Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the sympathomimetics and vasopressors. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the sympathomimetics and vasopressors. Begin by classifying them.
The sympathomimetics are drugs that mimic the actions of the sympathetic nervous
system by acting, directly or indirectly, on adrenergic receptors.
They are classified in several overlapping ways.
By chemical structure into the catecholamines — adrenaline,
also called epinephrine; noradrenaline, or norepinephrine; dopamine; dobutamine;
and isoprenaline — and the non-catecholamines, such as ephedrine, phenylephrine,
metaraminol and methoxamine.
By mechanism into direct-acting agents, which stimulate the receptor themselves;
indirect-acting agents, which act by releasing stored noradrenaline;
and mixed agents. And by receptor selectivity — their relative actions at alpha and
beta adrenoceptors.
Vasopressin and its analogues act through a separate,
non-adrenergic receptor and are considered alongside as vasopressors.
So they are grouped by structure, by direct or indirect mechanism,
and by their adrenoceptor profile, which together determine their clinical effects.
Describe the adrenergic receptors and their effects.
The adrenoceptors are G-protein-coupled receptors of several types.
The alpha-one receptors, on vascular smooth muscle,
mediate vasoconstriction and so a rise in systemic vascular resistance and blood
pressure.
The alpha-two receptors are largely presynaptic,
providing negative feedback on noradrenaline release,
and centrally mediate a reduction in sympathetic outflow.
The beta-one receptors, predominantly cardiac, mediate increased heart rate,
contractility and conduction.
The beta-two receptors, on bronchial and vascular smooth muscle,
mediate bronchodilation and vasodilatation, particularly in skeletal muscle,
and metabolic effects. The dopaminergic receptors mediate renal and mesenteric
vasodilatation.
So the cardiovascular and other effects of any sympathomimetic are predicted by
which of these receptors it stimulates and with what relative potency,
which is the key to understanding the whole class.
What are the signal-transduction mechanisms?
Each adrenoceptor couples to a particular G protein and second-messenger pathway.
The alpha-one receptor couples through the Gq protein to phospholipase C,
generating inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol,
raising intracellular calcium and causing smooth-muscle contraction and
vasoconstriction.
The beta receptors — beta-one and beta-two — couple through the Gs protein to
adenylate cyclase, raising cyclic AMP,
which through protein kinase A increases cardiac contractility and rate at the
beta-one receptor and relaxes smooth muscle at the beta-two.
The alpha-two receptor couples through the Gi protein,
inhibiting adenylate cyclase and reducing cyclic AMP,
which underlies its presynaptic inhibition of noradrenaline release.
So the divergent effects — vasoconstriction, cardiac stimulation,
smooth-muscle relaxation — follow from the different G proteins and second
messengers to which the receptors couple.
Distinguish direct, indirect and mixed sympathomimetics.
Direct-acting sympathomimetics bind and activate the adrenoceptor themselves —
adrenaline, noradrenaline, phenylephrine and isoprenaline are examples — so their
effect does not depend on endogenous noradrenaline stores.
Indirect-acting agents act by displacing and releasing noradrenaline from the
sympathetic nerve terminals, so they depend on intact stores and a functioning
release mechanism; tyramine is the classic example,
and part of ephedrine's action is indirect.
Mixed agents, such as ephedrine and metaraminol,
have both a direct receptor action and an indirect releasing action.
The practical importance is that indirect and mixed agents show tachyphylaxis — a
diminishing effect with repeated doses as the noradrenaline stores are depleted —
and that their effect is reduced in the catecholamine-depleted patient and altered
by drugs affecting noradrenaline handling.
So the direct-indirect distinction predicts tachyphylaxis and the dependence on
noradrenaline stores.
Take me through adrenaline.
Adrenaline is the prototypical catecholamine,
an agonist at alpha and beta receptors whose balance of effect is dose-dependent.
At low doses the beta effects predominate,
increasing heart rate and contractility and causing some vasodilatation in skeletal
muscle through beta-two, while at higher doses the alpha-one vasoconstriction
dominates, raising systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure.
It is therefore a powerful inopressor. Its indications are the first-line treatment
of anaphylaxis, cardiac arrest, and severe shock and bradycardia,
and it is added to local anaesthetics for vasoconstriction.
It is given by intramuscular injection in anaphylaxis,
by intravenous bolus in cardiac arrest, and by titrated infusion for shock.
Its adverse effects are tachyarrhythmias, myocardial ischaemia, hypertension,
hyperglycaemia and a rise in lactate.
So adrenaline is the versatile, dose-dependent alpha-and-beta agonist for
anaphylaxis, arrest and shock.
Describe noradrenaline and its place in shock.
Noradrenaline, or norepinephrine, is a catecholamine that acts predominantly on
alpha-one receptors, with some beta-one activity but little beta-two,
so its main effect is potent vasoconstriction raising systemic vascular resistance
and blood pressure, with modest direct cardiac stimulation,
and the rise in pressure may cause a reflex bradycardia.
It is the first-line vasopressor in septic and other vasodilatory shock,
where the primary problem is a low systemic vascular resistance,
and it is used to restore perfusion pressure, titrated by infusion,
ideally through a central vein because of the risk of tissue necrosis on
extravasation.
Its adverse effects are excessive vasoconstriction with organ and digital
ischaemia, and arrhythmia.
So noradrenaline is the vasopressor of choice for vasodilatory shock,
raising pressure chiefly by alpha-one vasoconstriction,
given by central infusion and titrated to a perfusion-pressure target.
Describe phenylephrine and metaraminol.
Phenylephrine is a direct-acting, selective alpha-one agonist, a non-catecholamine,
that produces vasoconstriction and a rise in blood pressure without direct cardiac
stimulation; the rise in pressure typically causes a reflex bradycardia.
It is used to treat hypotension, particularly the vasodilatation of spinal and
general anaesthesia, by bolus or infusion,
and is valued in situations where tachycardia is undesirable,
such as in the patient with ischaemic heart disease or aortic stenosis.
Metaraminol is a predominantly alpha agonist with both direct and indirect actions,
used similarly to treat anaesthesia-related hypotension by bolus or infusion,
also tending to cause reflex bradycardia.
So both are alpha-predominant pressors used to correct anaesthetic hypotension,
raising pressure by vasoconstriction with a reflex slowing of the heart,
useful where increasing the heart rate would be unwanted.
Describe ephedrine.
Ephedrine is a non-catecholamine with a mixed direct and indirect action at alpha
and beta receptors, so it raises both the heart rate and contractility through beta
stimulation and the systemic vascular resistance through alpha stimulation,
increasing blood pressure and cardiac output.
Because part of its action is indirect, through the release of noradrenaline,
it shows tachyphylaxis with repeated doses and is less effective in the
catecholamine-depleted patient. It has a longer duration than the catecholamines
and is given by bolus.
It has traditionally been used to treat hypotension during anaesthesia,
particularly where a degree of cardiac stimulation is acceptable or wanted,
such as hypotension with bradycardia, and was long favoured in obstetric practice,
although that preference has changed.
So ephedrine is the mixed-action pressor that raises pressure, rate and output,
with tachyphylaxis from its indirect component.
Why has phenylephrine largely replaced ephedrine for hypotension at caesarean
section?
Ephedrine was traditionally preferred in obstetrics on the belief that it preserved
uteroplacental blood flow better than the alpha agonists.
Subsequent evidence reversed this: ephedrine, through its beta effects,
crosses the placenta and stimulates fetal metabolism, producing fetal acidosis,
with lower umbilical arterial pH in the neonate, whereas phenylephrine,
correcting the maternal hypotension by alpha-one vasoconstriction without these
fetal metabolic effects, is associated with better fetal acid-base status.
Phenylephrine has therefore become the vasopressor of choice for the hypotension of
spinal anaesthesia at caesarean section, commonly given by prophylactic infusion,
with its reflex bradycardia managed as needed; metaraminol is an alternative.
So the recognition that ephedrine causes fetal acidosis,
while phenylephrine does not, has made phenylephrine the preferred agent in
obstetric spinal hypotension.
Describe dopamine and the controversy over renal-dose dopamine.
Dopamine is an endogenous catecholamine and the precursor of noradrenaline,
with dose-dependent effects: at low doses it stimulates dopaminergic receptors,
causing renal and mesenteric vasodilatation;
at moderate doses it stimulates beta-one receptors,
increasing contractility and rate; and at high doses it stimulates alpha-one
receptors, causing vasoconstriction.
The so-called renal-dose dopamine, given at low rate to increase renal blood flow
and urine output and so protect the kidney,
was widely used but has been shown not to prevent or treat acute kidney injury or
improve outcome, while exposing the patient to tachyarrhythmias and other harm;
it has therefore been abandoned for renal protection.
Dopamine as a vasopressor or inotrope has also fallen from favour,
being associated with more arrhythmias than noradrenaline.
So dopamine has a dose-dependent profile,
but renal-dose dopamine is discredited and the drug is now little used.
Describe isoprenaline and vasopressin..
Isoprenaline is a synthetic catecholamine that is a potent agonist at beta-one and
beta-two receptors with no alpha activity, so it increases heart rate,
contractility and conduction and causes vasodilatation,
lowering systemic vascular resistance;
its main use is as a temporising treatment for severe bradycardia and heart block,
increasing the rate, pending pacing.
Vasopressin, antidiuretic hormone, acts not on adrenoceptors but on vascular V1
receptors to cause vasoconstriction,
and is used as a second-line vasopressor in vasodilatory and septic shock,
particularly where noradrenaline alone is insufficient,
and in cardiac arrest in some protocols;
its analogue terlipressin is used in hepatorenal syndrome and variceal bleeding.
So isoprenaline is the pure beta agonist for bradycardia,
and vasopressin a non-adrenergic vasoconstrictor used as an adjunct in refractory
vasodilatory shock.
Summarise the cardiovascular and metabolic effects across the class.
The cardiovascular effects follow the receptor profile:
alpha-one stimulation raises systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure and
may cause reflex bradycardia; beta-one stimulation raises heart rate,
contractility, conduction velocity and myocardial oxygen demand;
beta-two stimulation causes vasodilatation in skeletal muscle and bronchodilatation.
Agents combining alpha and beta effects, such as adrenaline, raise pressure,
rate and output together.
Beyond the circulation, beta stimulation produces metabolic effects —
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis causing hyperglycaemia, lipolysis,
and a rise in lactate — and bronchodilatation,
and it causes tremor and hypokalaemia by driving potassium into cells.
So each agent's full effect, cardiovascular and metabolic,
is read off from its pattern of alpha, beta and dopaminergic stimulation,
which is why the receptor pharmacology is the organising principle of the class.
How are these drugs administered, and what are the practical cautions?
The catecholamines have a very short duration, being rapidly metabolised,
so they are given by continuous titrated infusion for sustained effect,
whereas the longer-acting non-catecholamines such as ephedrine,
phenylephrine and metaraminol can be given by intermittent bolus as well as
infusion.
The potent vasoconstrictors, noradrenaline and high-dose adrenaline and dopamine,
are given through a central vein wherever possible,
because extravasation of these vasoconstrictors causes tissue ischaemia and
necrosis; if extravasation occurs, the area may be infiltrated with an
alpha-blocker such as phentolamine.
Infusions are titrated to a haemodynamic target,
ideally with invasive arterial monitoring and, for the inopressors,
cardiac-output monitoring.
So the catecholamines need infusion through a central line with invasive
monitoring, while the bolus pressors are used for transient anaesthetic
hypotension, with extravasation a key hazard of the vasoconstrictors.
What are the principal adverse effects and how are they managed?
The adverse effects follow from excessive adrenergic stimulation.
Beta effects cause tachycardia, tachyarrhythmias and increased myocardial oxygen
demand with the risk of ischaemia, and the metabolic effects of hyperglycaemia,
hyperlactataemia and hypokalaemia.
Alpha effects cause excessive vasoconstriction with hypertension and organ,
digital and tissue ischaemia, and extravasation necrosis.
These are managed by careful titration to the lowest effective dose against a
defined target, by choosing the agent to suit the haemodynamic problem,
by central administration of vasoconstrictors, and by monitoring the heart rhythm,
the perfusion and, where relevant, glucose, lactate and potassium.
Reflex bradycardia from pure alpha agonists may need an antimuscarinic.
So the adverse effects are the predictable excess of the drugs' intended actions,
managed by titration, appropriate agent choice, central delivery and monitoring.
How would you choose a vasopressor or inopressor for a given shock state?
I would match the drug to the haemodynamic disturbance.
In vasodilatory shock, such as septic shock,
where systemic vascular resistance is low, noradrenaline is the first-line agent,
with vasopressin added if a second agent is needed,
and adrenaline or an inotrope added if there is myocardial depression.
In anaphylaxis, adrenaline is the first-line treatment for its combined alpha and
beta effects. In cardiogenic shock, where the problem is poor contractility,
an inotrope such as dobutamine, sometimes with a vasopressor, is used.
For the transient hypotension of anaesthesia,
a bolus pressor — phenylephrine or metaraminol where the heart rate is adequate or
high, ephedrine where there is bradycardia — is appropriate,
with phenylephrine preferred in obstetric spinal hypotension.
So the choice follows the underlying problem: vasoconstrictor for low resistance,
inotrope for poor contractility, adrenaline for anaphylaxis.
Pull it together: how do you use these agents rationally?
I would use the receptor pharmacology to choose and titrate the agent to the
haemodynamic problem.
For sustained support I would use a titrated infusion of a catecholamine through a
central vein with invasive monitoring — noradrenaline for the low resistance of
vasodilatory shock, adrenaline for anaphylaxis and as an inopressor,
an inotrope for poor contractility — aiming at a defined perfusion-pressure or
cardiac-output target rather than a fixed dose.
For the transient hypotension of anaesthesia I would use a bolus pressor matched to
the heart rate, choosing phenylephrine or metaraminol when tachycardia is to be
avoided and in obstetric spinal hypotension,
and ephedrine when bradycardia accompanies the hypotension.
I would deliver vasoconstrictors centrally to avoid extravasation necrosis,
monitor the rhythm, perfusion and metabolic effects,
and use the lowest effective dose, while treating the underlying cause.
So rational use is receptor-guided, target-directed,
monitored and matched to the specific shock state.
How are the catecholamines metabolised, and what follows from their short duration?
The catecholamines are metabolised rapidly by two enzymes: monoamine oxidase,
found in nerve terminals and the liver and gut, and catechol-O-methyltransferase,
found widely; together they degrade adrenaline,
noradrenaline and dopamine to inactive metabolites such as the metanephrines and
vanillylmandelic acid, which are excreted in the urine and are measured in the
diagnosis of phaeochromocytoma.
Because this metabolism is rapid, the catecholamines have a half-life of only a few
minutes, which is why they are given by continuous titrated infusion rather than as
a sustained bolus, and why their effect ceases quickly when the infusion is
stopped, allowing fine control.
It also explains the interaction with monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
which by blocking the enzyme exaggerate and prolong the response,
particularly to the indirect sympathomimetics.
So rapid enzymatic metabolism dictates infusion administration and underlies the
monoamine-oxidase-inhibitor interaction.
Describe the use and dose of adrenaline in anaphylaxis.
Adrenaline is the first-line, life-saving treatment of anaphylaxis,
and its early administration is the single most important intervention.
In the adult it is given intramuscularly into the anterolateral thigh,
in a dose of five hundred micrograms,
repeated after five minutes if there is no improvement.
The intramuscular route is preferred for initial treatment because it is safe and
effective and avoids the arrhythmia risk of an intravenous bolus;
intravenous adrenaline, in smaller titrated doses or an infusion,
is reserved for the setting of established monitoring, such as during anaesthesia,
and for refractory cases managed by those experienced in its use.
It works by alpha-one vasoconstriction reversing the hypotension and oedema,
and beta effects relieving bronchospasm and stabilising mast cells.
So in anaphylaxis adrenaline is given early,
intramuscularly at five hundred micrograms in the adult, repeated as needed,
with intravenous use confined to the monitored setting.
Describe the use of adrenaline in cardiac arrest.
In cardiac arrest adrenaline is given as a one-milligram intravenous bolus,
repeated every three to five minutes during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
The rationale is its alpha-one-mediated vasoconstriction,
which raises the aortic diastolic pressure and so coronary and cerebral perfusion
during chest compressions, improving the chance of return of spontaneous
circulation.
In a non-shockable rhythm it is given as soon as possible;
in a shockable rhythm it is given after the third shock, alongside amiodarone.
The evidence is that adrenaline improves the return of spontaneous circulation and
short-term survival, though its effect on long-term neurologically intact survival
is debated, the concern being that its vasoconstriction may impair microcirculatory
and cerebral perfusion.
So adrenaline at one milligram every three to five minutes is standard in cardiac
arrest, improving the return of circulation,
with its effect on neurological outcome less certain.
What is the place of selective beta-2 agonists?
The selective beta-two agonists, such as salbutamol and terbutaline,
are sympathomimetics designed to stimulate the beta-two receptors selectively,
producing bronchodilatation with relatively little of the cardiac beta-one
stimulation of the non-selective agents,
so they are the mainstay of treating bronchospasm — in asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, including intraoperative bronchospasm — given by
inhalation or, in severe cases, intravenously.
Their beta-two action is also used to relax the uterus as a tocolytic to suppress
premature labour.
Their adverse effects reflect beta-two stimulation and some loss of selectivity at
higher doses: tremor, tachycardia, hypokalaemia from the intracellular shift of
potassium, and hyperglycaemia.
So the selective beta-two agonists are the bronchodilators and tocolytics of the
class, exploiting beta-two selectivity, with tremor,
tachycardia and hypokalaemia as their characteristic effects.
Discuss receptor downregulation and its relevance in chronic illness and sepsis.
Prolonged or intense stimulation of the adrenoceptors leads to their downregulation
and desensitisation — a reduction in receptor number and responsiveness — which is
relevant in several settings.
In chronic heart failure, the sustained high sympathetic drive downregulates the
cardiac beta receptors, so the failing heart responds less to beta agonists,
which is one rationale for the phosphodiesterase inhibitors,
acting beyond the receptor, and for beta-blockade to restore receptor sensitivity
over time.
In sepsis and prolonged critical illness, adrenoceptor responsiveness falls,
so escalating doses of catecholamines may be needed and a point of catecholamine
resistance may be reached, which is part of the rationale for adding a
non-adrenergic vasopressor such as vasopressin.
So downregulation explains the diminishing response to catecholamines in chronic
heart failure and sepsis, and the use of agents acting by other mechanisms.
Expand on the role of vasopressin in shock and arrest.
Vasopressin, antidiuretic hormone, acts on vascular V1 receptors to cause
vasoconstriction through a non-adrenergic mechanism,
which is useful because it is preserved when adrenoceptor responsiveness is reduced.
In septic and other vasodilatory shock it is used as a second-line vasopressor
added to noradrenaline, allowing the catecholamine dose to be reduced and restoring
pressure where catecholamine responsiveness is failing;
a relative vasopressin deficiency is described in septic shock.
Its analogue terlipressin is used in hepatorenal syndrome and to control variceal
bleeding by splanchnic vasoconstriction. Vasopressin was previously included in
cardiac-arrest algorithms but is no longer recommended in preference to adrenaline.
Its adverse effects are excessive vasoconstriction with ischaemia,
including splanchnic and coronary. So vasopressin is the non-adrenergic
vasoconstrictor used as an adjunct in refractory vasodilatory shock and,
as terlipressin, in hepatorenal and variceal disease.
Tell me about dopexamine and the wider family.
Dopexamine is a synthetic catecholamine analogue that stimulates beta-two and
dopaminergic receptors, with little alpha or beta-one action,
so it produces vasodilatation, a modest increase in heart rate and contractility,
and an increase in renal and splanchnic blood flow;
it has been used to improve perfusion and cardiac output,
particularly in the perioperative optimisation of high-risk surgical patients,
although its use is limited.
It illustrates the broader principle that the sympathomimetic family can be
engineered for particular receptor profiles — isoprenaline for pure beta effect,
dobutamine for beta-one inotropy, dopexamine for beta-two and dopaminergic
vasodilatation and flow — to suit particular haemodynamic aims.
So dopexamine is a beta-two and dopaminergic agonist used to augment flow and
output, one of several agents tailored to a specific receptor profile within the
class.
Distinguish clearly between a vasopressor and an inotrope,
and what is an inopressor?
A vasopressor is a drug that raises blood pressure principally by vasoconstriction,
increasing systemic vascular resistance, through alpha-one or, for vasopressin,
V1 receptors — noradrenaline and phenylephrine are examples — and is used where the
problem is pathological vasodilatation, as in septic shock.
An inotrope is a drug that increases the force of myocardial contraction,
principally through beta-one stimulation,
raising cardiac output — dobutamine is the example — and is used where the problem
is poor contractility.
An inopressor is an agent that does both,
increasing contractility and causing vasoconstriction — adrenaline and
noradrenaline at higher doses — useful where both poor contractility and low
resistance coexist.
The distinction matters because giving a vasopressor to a failing heart,
or an inotrope to a vasodilated but contractile heart, treats the wrong problem.
So the terms describe the haemodynamic action,
and matching it to the disturbance is the key to rational use.
How does extravasation of a vasoconstrictor present and how is it managed?
Extravasation of a potent vasoconstrictor — noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine,
metaraminol — from a peripheral cannula causes intense local vasoconstriction and
ischaemia of the surrounding tissue, presenting with pallor, then a dusky, cold,
painful area, which can progress to skin necrosis and ulceration.
It is prevented by giving these agents through a central vein wherever possible and
by vigilant monitoring of any peripheral infusion.
If it occurs, the infusion is stopped, the cannula is usually left in to aspirate,
and the area is infiltrated with an alpha-adrenoceptor blocker — phentolamine —
which reverses the local vasoconstriction and restores perfusion;
topical vasodilators such as glyceryl trinitrate may be used.
So extravasation of a vasoconstrictor causes local ischaemic necrosis,
prevented by central administration and treated by stopping the infusion and
infiltrating phentolamine to reverse the vasoconstriction.
What is the interaction between the indirect sympathomimetics and monoamine oxidase
inhibitors?
The indirect-acting sympathomimetics,
such as ephedrine and the dietary amine tyramine,
act by releasing stored noradrenaline from nerve terminals.
Monoamine oxidase normally degrades the noradrenaline within the terminal,
so when monoamine oxidase is inhibited — by a monoamine oxidase inhibitor
antidepressant — the stores of noradrenaline are increased,
and an indirect sympathomimetic, or tyramine-containing food,
then releases an exaggerated amount, which can precipitate a hypertensive crisis.
This is the basis of the cheese reaction and of the danger of giving ephedrine to a
patient on a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. The safer approach in such a patient is
to use a direct-acting agent in reduced, titrated doses, with caution,
and to avoid the indirect agents.
So monoamine oxidase inhibition exaggerates the response to indirect
sympathomimetics and tyramine, risking a hypertensive crisis,
which guides agent choice in these patients.
Summarise the metabolic and other systemic effects of adrenergic stimulation.
Beyond the circulation, adrenergic stimulation, chiefly through beta receptors,
has important metabolic and other effects.
It stimulates glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis in the liver and reduces insulin
secretion, raising blood glucose, which is why catecholamine infusion and stress
cause hyperglycaemia. It stimulates lipolysis.
It drives potassium into cells through beta-two stimulation,
causing hypokalaemia — exploited in treating hyperkalaemia with salbutamol.
It increases the metabolic rate and can raise lactate.
It causes tremor through beta-two effects on skeletal muscle.
Alpha and beta effects also act on the eye, gut and bladder.
These effects are relevant when these drugs are infused: the glucose,
potassium and lactate may need monitoring,
and the metabolic disturbance interpreted in context.
So adrenergic stimulation produces hyperglycaemia, lipolysis, hypokalaemia,
a rise in lactate and tremor, which accompany the cardiovascular effects.
How would you set up and titrate a noradrenaline infusion for septic shock?
In septic shock, after recognising the vasodilatory state and beginning fluid
resuscitation and treatment of the source,
I would start noradrenaline as the first-line vasopressor to restore perfusion
pressure.
I would give it as a continuous infusion through a central venous catheter,
to avoid extravasation injury, with invasive arterial pressure monitoring,
titrating the rate to a mean arterial pressure target,
conventionally around sixty-five millimetres of mercury, adjusted to the patient.
I would assess the adequacy of perfusion by clinical signs,
urine output and lactate clearance,
and continue fluid resuscitation guided by dynamic measures.
If a high dose of noradrenaline is needed,
I would add vasopressin as a second agent,
and add an inotrope such as adrenaline or dobutamine if there is myocardial
depression.
So I would titrate a central noradrenaline infusion to a mean-pressure target with
invasive monitoring, adding vasopressin and an inotrope as required,
within the wider sepsis management.
Give a final integrated account of the rational use of sympathomimetics and
vasopressors.
I would let the receptor pharmacology and the haemodynamic problem guide the choice.
For the transient hypotension of anaesthesia I would use a bolus pressor matched to
the heart rate — phenylephrine or metaraminol when tachycardia is undesirable,
including obstetric spinal hypotension where phenylephrine avoids the fetal
acidosis of ephedrine, and ephedrine when bradycardia accompanies the hypotension.
For sustained support I would use a titrated central infusion of a catecholamine —
noradrenaline for vasodilatory shock,
adrenaline for anaphylaxis and as an inopressor,
dobutamine for poor contractility — against a defined perfusion target with
invasive monitoring, adding vasopressin where catecholamine responsiveness fails.
I would give vasoconstrictors centrally to avoid necrosis,
anticipate the metabolic effects, recognise tachyphylaxis with the indirect agents
and the danger with monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
and always treat the underlying cause.
So rational use is receptor-guided, target-directed,
route-appropriate and matched to the haemodynamic disturbance.
How does the baroreceptor reflex shape the response to these drugs?
The baroreceptor reflex is central to interpreting the response to vasopressors.
The arterial baroreceptors sense the rise in blood pressure a vasoconstrictor
produces and respond by reducing sympathetic outflow and increasing vagal tone,
slowing the heart.
This is why a pure alpha-one agonist such as phenylephrine,
which raises pressure without directly stimulating the heart,
characteristically causes a reflex bradycardia,
whereas an agent with beta-one activity, such as adrenaline or ephedrine,
raises both pressure and rate, the direct cardiac stimulation overriding the reflex.
The reflex is blunted in the elderly,
in autonomic neuropathy and under anaesthesia,
so the expected reflex changes may be absent.
So the baroreceptor reflex explains the reflex bradycardia of the alpha agonists
and the way an agent's net effect on heart rate reflects the balance of its direct
cardiac action and the reflex response to the pressure it generates.
Describe the central alpha-two agonists as sympatholytics.
The alpha-two adrenoceptor agonists — clonidine and the more selective
dexmedetomidine — act, in contrast to the pressor agents,
to reduce sympathetic activity: by stimulating central and presynaptic alpha-two
receptors they decrease noradrenaline release and central sympathetic outflow,
lowering blood pressure and heart rate,
and producing sedation and analgesia without significant respiratory depression.
In anaesthesia they are used as sedatives,
particularly dexmedetomidine for a rousable sedation,
as analgesic and anaesthetic-sparing adjuncts,
to attenuate the stress response and blunt haemodynamic surges,
and clonidine in the management of withdrawal states.
Their adverse effects are bradycardia, hypotension and, with clonidine,
rebound hypertension on abrupt withdrawal;
a transient hypertension can occur with rapid dexmedetomidine loading through
peripheral alpha-two stimulation.
So the alpha-two agonists are sympatholytics that sedate and lower pressure,
the mirror image of the pressor sympathomimetics.
Give practical guidance on the preparation and bolus dosing of the common
anaesthetic pressors.
For the transient hypotension of anaesthesia,
the common bolus pressors are prepared as dilute solutions and given in small
increments titrated to effect.
Phenylephrine is given in boluses of around fifty to one hundred micrograms,
repeated, or by infusion, particularly prophylactically in obstetric spinal
anaesthesia. Metaraminol is given in boluses of around half a milligram, repeated,
or by infusion.
Ephedrine is given in boluses of around three to six milligrams, repeated,
where some cardiac stimulation is acceptable, with awareness of tachyphylaxis.
These are titrated against the blood pressure and heart rate,
with the choice between them guided by the heart rate — an alpha agent where the
rate is adequate or high, ephedrine where there is bradycardia.
So the bolus pressors are given as small, titrated, dilute increments,
the dose and choice matched to the pressure and the heart rate,
ready-drawn for prompt treatment of anaesthetic hypotension.
How is cocaine a sympathomimetic?
Cocaine, besides being a local anaesthetic,
is an indirect sympathomimetic through a distinct mechanism:
it blocks the reuptake of noradrenaline, and other monoamines,
into the nerve terminal, so the released transmitter persists and accumulates at
the receptors, potentiating sympathetic effects.
This produces vasoconstriction — exploited in its topical use to shrink the nasal
mucosa — and systemic sympathomimetic toxicity: hypertension, tachycardia,
arrhythmias, hyperthermia and, importantly,
coronary vasoconstriction with the risk of myocardial ischaemia.
It is therefore relevant both as a drug of abuse presenting with sympathetic
toxicity and as a controlled topical agent.
So cocaine is an indirect sympathomimetic acting by blocking noradrenaline
reuptake, illustrating a third mechanism — reuptake inhibition — alongside direct
receptor stimulation and transmitter release,
with its characteristic vasoconstrictor and cardiotoxic effects.
Summarise the agents in a receptor-based comparison.
Comparing the agents by receptor action:
phenylephrine and methoxamine are pure alpha-one agonists — vasoconstrictors with
reflex bradycardia. Noradrenaline is mainly alpha-one with some beta-one — a
vasopressor with modest cardiac stimulation.
Metaraminol is alpha-predominant with mixed action.
Adrenaline is alpha and beta, dose-dependent — the inopressor.
Ephedrine is mixed alpha and beta, indirect and direct — raising pressure,
rate and output. Dobutamine is mainly beta-one — an inotrope.
Isoprenaline is pure beta — increasing rate and contractility with vasodilatation.
Dopamine is dose-dependent across dopaminergic, beta and alpha.
Salbutamol is beta-two — a bronchodilator. Vasopressin acts on V1, non-adrenergic.
So arranging the agents along the alpha-to-beta spectrum,
with the dopaminergic and the non-adrenergic vasopressin,
predicts the effect of each and guides the choice for vasoconstriction,
cardiac stimulation, bronchodilatation or combined support.
What are the uses of adrenaline beyond resuscitation and shock?
Adrenaline has several other uses that exploit its alpha and beta actions.
Added to local anaesthetic solutions,
its alpha-one vasoconstriction slows systemic absorption, prolonging the block,
reducing the peak plasma concentration and toxicity, and reducing local bleeding.
Nebulised adrenaline is used to reduce upper-airway oedema,
as in croup and post-extubation stridor, through mucosal vasoconstriction.
Its beta-two bronchodilatation contributes to its role in severe bronchospasm and
anaphylaxis.
Topically and by infiltration it is used for haemostasis.
So beyond cardiac arrest, anaphylaxis and shock,
adrenaline is used with local anaesthetics for vasoconstriction,
nebulised for airway oedema, and for haemostasis,
the same alpha and beta actions underlying these varied applications.
The dose and route are matched to the purpose,
from micrograms in a local-anaesthetic mixture to milligrams in arrest.
What is the difference between adrenaline's low-dose and high-dose effects,
and why does it matter?
Adrenaline's effects are dose-dependent because of the differing sensitivities of
the adrenoceptors.
At low doses the beta receptors, which are more sensitive, predominate:
beta-one increases heart rate and contractility,
and beta-two causes vasodilatation in skeletal muscle,
so the systemic vascular resistance may even fall while cardiac output rises.
At higher doses the alpha-one effect on vasoconstriction predominates,
raising systemic vascular resistance and pressure.
This matters clinically because the haemodynamic effect of an adrenaline infusion
changes with the rate: a low-dose infusion acts chiefly as an inotrope and
chronotrope, a high-dose infusion as a vasoconstrictor as well,
so the infusion is titrated to the desired effect and the response monitored.
So adrenaline's dose-dependence — beta at low dose,
alpha added at high dose — means its haemodynamic action shifts with the infusion
rate, which is exploited and monitored in titration.
Finally, how do these drugs interact with chronic beta-blockade and other
background therapy?
A patient's background therapy alters the response to the sympathomimetics,
and I would anticipate this.
Chronic beta-blockade blunts the beta-mediated effects,
so adrenaline's beta actions are attenuated and its alpha-one vasoconstriction is
left relatively unopposed, which can produce an exaggerated hypertensive response
with reflex bradycardia, and larger or alternative agents may be needed;
in refractory anaphylaxis in a beta-blocked patient,
glucagon is used to bypass the blockade.
Tricyclic antidepressants and cocaine, by blocking noradrenaline reuptake,
potentiate the direct sympathomimetics. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors exaggerate the
response to the indirect agents.
The catecholamine-depleted or chronically ill patient responds poorly to the
indirect agents.
So I would consider the background drugs — beta-blockade unmasking unopposed alpha
effects, reuptake inhibitors and monoamine oxidase inhibitors potentiating the
response — and adjust the choice and dose accordingly,
which is part of using these drugs safely.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Sympathomimetics are classified by structure (catecholamine vs not),
mechanism (direct, indirect, mixed) and adrenoceptor profile;
effects are read off the receptors stimulated — alpha-1 (vasoconstriction),
beta-1 (cardiac), beta-2 (vasodilation/bronchodilation), dopaminergic (renal).
Second, Adrenaline is the dose-dependent alpha-and-beta inopressor for anaphylaxis,
arrest and shock; noradrenaline (mainly alpha-1) is the first-line vasopressor for
vasodilatory/septic shock; phenylephrine/metaraminol are alpha pressors causing
reflex bradycardia.
Third, Indirect/mixed agents (ephedrine,
metaraminol) release stored noradrenaline and show tachyphylaxis;
phenylephrine has replaced ephedrine for spinal hypotension at caesarean section
because ephedrine crosses the placenta and causes fetal acidosis.
Fourth, Renal-dose dopamine is discredited (no renal protection, more arrhythmias);
vasopressin (V1, non-adrenergic) is a second-line vasopressor in refractory
vasodilatory shock; isoprenaline (pure beta) is used for bradycardia.
Fifth, Give catecholamines by titrated central infusion with invasive monitoring;
deliver vasoconstrictors centrally (extravasation causes necrosis,
treat with phentolamine); titrate to a perfusion target and watch for
tachyarrhythmia, ischaemia, hyperglycaemia and hyperlactataemia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.